Australasian Journal of Engineering Education ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/teen20 Exploring student disability and professional identity: navigating sociocultural expectations in U.S. undergraduate civil engineering programs Cassandra McCall, Ashley Shew, Denise R. Simmons, Marie C. Paretti & Lisa D. McNair To cite this article: Cassandra McCall, Ashley Shew, Denise R. Simmons, Marie C. Paretti & Lisa D. McNair (2020) Exploring student disability and professional identity: navigating sociocultural expectations in U.S. undergraduate civil engineering programs, Australasian Journal of Engineering Education, 25:1, 79-89, DOI: 10.1080/22054952.2020.1720434 To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/22054952.2020.1720434 © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group. Published online: 30 Jan 2020. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1477 View related articles View Crossmark data Citing articles: 13 View citing articles Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=teen20 AUSTRALASIAN JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION 2020, VOL. 25, NO. 1, 79–89 https://doi.org/10.1080/22054952.2020.1720434 ARTICLE Exploring student disability and professional identity: navigating sociocultural expectations in U.S. undergraduate civil engineering programs Cassandra McCalla, Ashley Shewb, Denise R. Simmonsc, Marie C. Parettia and Lisa D. McNaira aEngineering Education, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA; bScience, Technology, and Society, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA; cCivil and Coastal Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA ABSTRACT National agencies throughout Australia and the United States (U.S.) have called for broadened participation in engineering, including participation by individuals with disabilities. However, studies demonstrate that students with disabilities are not eﬀectively supported by university systems and cultures. This lack of support can shape how students form professional identities as they move through school and into careers. To better understand these experiences and create a more inclusive environment in engineering, we conducted a constructivist grounded theory exploration of professional identity formation in students who identify as having a disability as they study civil engineering and experience their ﬁrst year of work. We con- ducted semi-structured interviews with 24 undergraduate civil engineering students across the U.S. and analysed them using grounded theory techniques. Navigating sociocultural expecta- tions of disability emerged as one key theme, consisting of three strategy types: (1) neutrally satisfying expectations, (2) challenging expectations, and (3) aligning with expectations. Regardless of strategy, all participants navigated sociocultural expectations related to their studies and their disabilities. This theme highlights the ways sociocultural inﬂuences impact students’ navigation through their undergraduate civil engineering careers. These ﬁndings can be used to examine cultural barriers faced by students with disabilities to enhance their inclusion in engineering. ARTICLE HISTORY Received 1 October 2019 Accepted 17 January 2020 KEYWORDS Disability; grounded theory; identity; civil engineering 1. Introduction Current reports show that approximately 6% of Australian college students and 19% of United States (U.S.) college students have identiﬁed as having a disability to their institution of higher education (Koshy and Seymour 2015; NCES 2019). While the number of students with disabilities matriculating into higher education is slowly increasing (Cunninghame, Costello, and Trinidad 2016; Vaccaro et al. 2015), this group still remains largely underrepresented within STEM in both the U.S. (Chubin, May, and Babco 2005) and Australia (Cunninghame, Costello, and Trinidad 2016). This lack of representation highlights deeper issues of access and inclusion within secondary education; students with disabilities often leave sec- ondary school with lower college aspirations (Kimball et al. 2016). Moreover, of those who do pursue higher education, many do not choose to register with dis- ability services oﬃces at their university due to a number of reasons, including feelings of cheating, surrounding disability concerns (Barnard-Brak et al. 2010; Cunninghame, Costello, and Trinidad 2016; Ganguly et al. 2015; Kent 2016), and the potential to jeopardize future career plans (e.g., the armed forces). Of particular concern within engineering education, students with disabilities are stigmas about often discouraged from taking engineering-related courses (Lee 2014). Those who do enrol in engineering and other STEM majors are often not supported eﬀec- tively (Cunninghame, Costello, and Trinidad 2016; Lee 2014; Ryan 2007) and left to navigate university structures typically designed for those without disabil- ities on their own (Hadley 2011; Kimball et al. 2016). This lack of support has been traced to broad deﬁ- nitions of disability within government agencies (Cunninghame, Costello, and Trinidad 2016) and a lack of attention from researchers to eﬀectively address the needs of this population, particularly as they move into STEM ﬁelds (Forlin 2004; Kimball et al. 2016; Spingola 2018). To provide these students with the necessary resources for academic success, many institutions of higher education refer to deﬁni- tions of disability established by governmental agen- cies perspectives (Commwealth of Australia 2015; Cunninghame, Costello, and Trinidad 2016; Disabled World 2015; U.S. Department of Justice 2009). Researchers and equity groups criticize these broad, normative deﬁni- tions as being too vague and failing to adequately describe disability, particularly when considering the range and combinations of diﬀerences, variabilities, or impairments an individual may experience across changing contexts (Adams, Reiss, and Serlin 2015; from medicalized derived CONTACT Cassandra McCall cgroen@vt.edu Engineering Education, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 80 C. MCCALL ET AL. Cunninghame, Costello, and Trinidad 2016). As a result, these deﬁnitions can make it more diﬃcult for individuals to access necessary resources for suc- cess in school and work. This issue is exacerbated due to the paucity of research that explores the needs of these individuals (Kimball et al. 2016; Lee 2014) and their experiences in higher education. Work that does exist has sparked debate regarding streamlining (Linton 1998) or nor- malising students with disabilities into general educa- tion contexts (Forlin 2004; Konza 2008; Linton 1998). While proponents of educational inclusion cite posi- tive social, psychological, and cognitive outcomes for all students, opponents point to a lack of resources and support for students with disabilities and faculty (for an in-depth description of this debate in both the U.S. and Australian contexts, see Forlin 2004; Konza 2008; Linton 1998). At the same time, this debate turns the spotlight on the concept of normalisation, or what Bogart and Dunn (2019) identify as ‘assimilation’ (652), as it reﬂects medicalized paradigms (e.g. U.S. Americans with Disabilities Act, 1990; Australian Disability Discrimination Act, 1992) and ableist privi- lege that shape the societal, cultural, and educational norms to which individuals with disabilities are expected to adhere. To counteract this exclusionary frame, we need research that centres the voices and experiences of people with disabilities as informants of inclusive education. Within engineering, many calls have implored edu- cators and researchers to broaden participation (e.g. Engineers Australia 2017; Jamieson and Lohmann 2009); however, these conversations typically centre on race and gender with little to no work addressing students’ experiences with disability (Lee 2014; Ryan 2007; Spingola 2018; Svyantek 2016). Reﬂective of the research in higher education broadly, scholars in engi- neering education have examined the systemic and personal barriers experienced by engineering students with disabilities (e.g. Butler et al. 2017; Pearson Weatherton, Mayes, and Villanueva-Perez 2017; Ryan 2007). However, little work has examined the ways students with disabilities experience, interpret, internalize, and engage in the ﬁeld to become profes- sional engineers. This gap is problematic, as research in higher experiencing a disability can inﬂuence the ways students perceive and experience school, develop professional identities, and remain in their professions (Kimball et al. 2016; Lichtenstein et al. 2009; Tonso 2014). education suggests that Our study bridges this gap by exploring the experiences of students with disabilities as they move through their undergraduate careers and into the civil engineering workforce within the U.S. To contribute to conversations that move beyond mere tolerance and actively welcome a diverse range of to students in engineering, study seeks this civil understand the ways undergraduate students experi- ence disability as they form professional identities as civil engineers. We focus here on the emergent ﬁnd- ings from a grounded theory examination of inter- views with 24 undergraduate engineering students who identify as individuals with physical, learning, cognitive, and/or mental health disabilities. Given the similarities across U.S. and Australian con- texts suggested by reported challenges in enrolment, retention, and climate for students with disabilities (Cunninghame, Costello, and Trinidad 2016; Gale and Parker 2013; Martin et al. 2011; Pearson Weatherton, Mayes, and Villanueva-Perez 2017), as well as parallels in the culture of engineering pro- grams in Australia (e.g. Godfrey 2014; Godfrey and Parker 2010) and the U.S. (e.g. Downey 2014; Jorgenson 2002; Tonso 2006a), we hope our ﬁndings can contribute to an international dialogue focused on the inclusion of individuals with disabilities in engineering education. 2. A note on language Throughout scholarly literature and daily discourse, an ongoing debate exists between the use of person- ﬁrst and identity-ﬁrst language to describe disability (Brown 2011; Liebowitz 2015). While this debate may initially seem a superﬂuous disagreement, the use of these phrases are important and highlight signiﬁcant implications for an individual and their identiﬁcation with disability. Person-ﬁrst language (e.g. a person with dyslexia) positions the person before the dis- theoretically underscoring the value and ability, worth of an individual by recognizing the person before the condition (Brown 2011). Identity-ﬁrst lan- guage (e.g. a dyslexic person), in contrast, positions the disability or condition before the person, thus communicating it as an inherent aspect of one’s identity (Brown 2011; Liebowitz 2015). In this paper, we generally use person-ﬁrst language, reﬂect- ing current disciplinary and higher education norms; this approach is seen in legislation such as the U.S. Americans with Disabilities Act (1990), Australia’s and the Disability Discrimination Act United Nations’ Convention on Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2008). However, we recognise that, among members of the disability community, preferences vary, and we value and aﬃrm the ways in which activists like Stella Young have reframed dis- ability through the social model and insisted on using ‘disabled’ as an identifying adjective in asserting themselves as disabled people (Young 2014). To remain true to participant voices and identities, then, we use the language choices of our participants where appropriate, which may be person-ﬁrst (e.g. Sammie) or identity ﬁrst (e.g. Shawn). (1992), 3. Sensitizing concepts Three frameworks serve as sensitizing concepts for this study (Charmaz 2014): social identity theory (Spears 2011; Tajfel and Turner 1979), intersectional- ity (Collins 2015; Crenshaw 1989), and identity sal- ience (Abes, Jones, and McEwen 2007). Social identity theory posits that individuals partially deﬁne who they are through intra- and inter-group comparisons and self-categorization, based on the values and regulatory inﬂuences to which particular groups ascribe (Abrams 2015; Tonso 2014). This theory is useful because it aligns with studies that situate disability as a social group (Kimball et al. 2016). Intersectionality was initi- ally conceived by black women as a means to confront social inequities based on interactions of race and gender by describing the ways intersected identities shape all experience and cannot be reduced to one identity alone (e.g. that of being a woman or that of being African-American) (Collins 2015; Crenshaw 1989). It has evolved as a lens for examining the interrelations among various dimensions of a single individual’s identity (Abes, Jones, and McEwen 2007). In this study, we use intersectionality to acknowledge the interrelated and integrated nature of students’ various identity dimensions as they navigate their undergraduate careers. Lastly, multiple dimensions of identity and identity salience posit that one’s sense of self is inﬂuenced by multiple factors that become more or less salient through various contexts and interactions as individuals interpret and make mean- ing of them (Abes, Jones, and McEwen 2007). Within the context of this study, we recognise disability as a powerful social construction that shapes the lives of our participants, as a social categorization to which individuals are socially assigned or ascribed (Kimball et al. 2016), and as a dimension of how a person chooses to identify themselves as well as how the world recognises (or fails to recognise) them. 4. Prior work While professional identity is often used to capture the developmental aspects of an individual’s identity as they prepare for careers, research also emphasizes the reciprocal inﬂuences of personal identity on profes- sional formation (Capobianco 2006; Cech and Waidzunas 2011; Faulkner 2000; Foor, Walden, and Trytten 2007; McGee and Martin 2011; Steele 2011) . Therefore, in addition to the three sensitizing con- cepts, this work is informed by research on the inter- actions and professional identities. The Advancing from Outsider to Insider Grounded Theory of Professional Identity Negotiation (the AOI Model), developed by Groen (2017) with McNair, Simmons, and Paretti, captured the complex, dynamic nature of professional identity and interrelations across personal AUSTRALASIAN JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION 81 formation as civil engineering students advance from an outsider (i.e. an individual not belonging to the civil engineering profession) to an insider (i.e. an indivi- dual belonging to the civil engineering profession). The AOI Model posits that individuals iteratively undertake a variety of identity negotiations to balance their deﬁnitions of self and profession to maintain identiﬁcation with civil engineering and achieve their career goals (Groen 2017; Groen et al. 2018b). This study expands the model to focus on the professional identity formation of civil engineering students with disabilities. 5. Positionality statement Aligning with the mantra of ‘nothing about us without us,’ (Charlton 2000) used by many who identify with disability, the majority of our research team identiﬁes as either a person with a disability or as a disabled person and vary in our use of person-ﬁrst and iden- tity-ﬁrst language. With the aim of broadening parti- cipation in engineering, we use our work to inform inclusive educational systems that move beyond indi- vidual accommodation and toward universal access and the removal of barriers to access. As such, our work stems from social models of disability that focus on the social and political structures that produce a dynamic and ﬂuid identity consisting of a variety of physical, cognitive, or developmental diﬀerences (Adams, Reiss, and Serlin 2015). That is, we do not conceptualize disability as a condition or ‘sickness’ to be 'treated’ (DasGupta 2015; Davis 2015), but as a diﬀerence that is experienced while navigating sys- tems constructed with an assumed sense of normality. This orientation toward disability studies research positions us to examine the accessibility of physical, bureaucratic, and social institutional structures while centring on participants’ experiences within these sys- tems. As such, we do not speak for the individuals participating in this study, but rather bring their voices to the forefront of this work. 6. Methods Because actively creating space for students who iden- tify with disability requires deepening our understand- ing of the ways these individuals experience disability as they form professional identities, we are conducting a longitudinal grounded theory study. Most com- monly used to make sense of a process when a theory is not available, grounded theory is also useful for adapting existing theory to a speciﬁc sample popu- lation possessing characteristics of interest (Charmaz 2014; Creswell 2013). Given prior research examining the nuanced experiences and access requirements of students with disabilities in higher education – and particularly in engineering – this approach enables us 82 C. MCCALL ET AL. to develop a richer understanding of why and how these students form professional engineering identities as they move through their undergraduate programs and into the workforce. To bound our study, we focus on civil engineering, one of the oldest and most codi- ﬁed engineering professions (Groen et al. 2018a). 6.1. Cultural context As a nationwide study exploring experiences of dis- ability within civil engineering programs across the this research was highly inﬂuenced by the U.S., nation’s cultural and political climates. Because they may diﬀer from those outside the U.S., we provide context to orient readers and illuminate the signiﬁ- cance of emergent ﬁndings discussed in later sections. This study was intentionally designed so that parti- cipants were not required to disclose their disability to their academic institution for two reasons: (1) to be inclusive of students from all socio-economic statuses, and (2) to avoid coercing students into institutional disclosure. First, to receive necessary accommodations within the U.S. higher education system, students must submit medical documentation to their institu- tion’s disability services oﬃce. Due to the structure of the U.S. healthcare system, obtaining these diagnoses can be a time-intensive and ﬁnancially draining pro- cess, especially for students coming from low-income families or putting themselves through school on a limited income. Second, as researchers, we strongly believe that disclosure to one’s institution is a personal choice, and because disability is still highly stigmatized throughout U.S. culture, individuals with non- apparent disabilities may prefer to pass as non- disabled. For these reasons, many students choose to navigate school without requesting accommodations. However, despite having access to free healthcare in Australia, studies have reported similar trends in dis- closure, positing that the number of students with disabilities in university contexts remains underrepre- sented due to associated stigma and lack of support (Cunninghame, Costello, and Trinidad 2016). By eliminating this requirement for institutional disclo- sure, we sought students from any socio-economic background and any disability identiﬁcation to con- tribute to this work and share their experiences. 6.2. Recruitment, data collection, and analysis Upon obtaining human subjects research approval, a participation invitation and recruitment survey were electronically distributed nationwide to students through institutional (e.g. civil engineering programs, disability services oﬃces) and professional listservs (e.g. American Society of Civil Engineers, American Society for Engineering Education, etc.). Due to the in limited number of students with disabilities undergraduate civil engineering programs, all students who expressed interest and satisﬁed our sampling criteria were contacted by a member of the research team. Eligible participants were those who experi- enced any form of cognitive, developmental, physical, or mental health disability. While participant recruit- ment remains open to date, a total of 24 participants (9 men, 14 women, 1 non-binary individual) from a total of 19 universities were recruited and interviewed at the time of this study. Semi-structured interviews, each lasting between 60 and 90 minutes, were conducted using intensive inter- viewing approaches (Charmaz 2014) framed by con- structive interviewing (Charmaz 2014) and critical incident techniques (e.g. Sattler, Turns, and Gygi 2009; Simmons 2012). Due to the exploratory nature of this study and the myriad of impacts that diﬀerent disabilities may have on students’ identity formation, combining these techniques enabled us to tailor each interview to participants’ unique responses and achieve an in-depth exploration of individuals’ experi- ences. To ensure accurate capture of individuals’ iden- tity preferences, participants were asked their preferences regarding the use of person-ﬁrst or iden- tity-ﬁrst language. Interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed, and ﬁeld notes were recorded to pre- serve the context and subtle implications of topics discussed by participants. To protect participants’ identities, each participant chose their own pseudo- nym to represent them in the study; these pseudonyms are used to identify participant quotations and experi- ences throughout the manuscript. Aligning with the coding procedures of grounded theory research (Charmaz 2014), initial and focused coding were conducted line-by-line and incident-by- incident for each interview to identify critical inci- dents that related to professional identity formation and disability. Critical incidents were identiﬁed in interview transcripts as utterances (in the form or stories or discussion topics) that a participant used to enact or indicate identiﬁcation or deidentiﬁcation with their disability and professional identities. That is, rather than topically coding the content of what participants said, codes captured abstracted meaning of what participants were doing with what they said (Gee 2011). This iterative, constant comparative pro- cess continued across all transcripts until no new themes emerged. Researcher insights were captured in memos that served as a methodological audit trail as well as a data source during analysis and theory development. 7. Navigating sociocultural expectations of disability Drawing from a larger grounded theory analysis, we focus here on a single emergent theme that appears salient across national boundaries: navigating socio- cultural expectations of disability. This theme captures the ways participants navigate the development and enactment of their own conceptualizations of disabil- ity in relation to established assumptions and expecta- tions in U.S. culture broadly as well as in civil engineering speciﬁcally. This theme identiﬁes the ways participants position themselves or are posi- tioned by others as ‘disabled.’ Given that this position- ality is culturally constructed and enacted across individuals, we also drew from the social model of disability (DasGupta 2015) and research examining engineering culture norms of U.S. (Cech and Jorgenson 2002; Tonso 2006b). Waidzunas 2011; From this perspective, we conceptualized this posi- tioning as an enactment of identity that is bound by the aﬀordances and constraints of the culture in which it is created. In the following sections, we describe the ways participants neutrally satisﬁed, challenged, or aligned with cultural expectations and deﬁnitions of disability as they formed professional identities. To stay true to participants’ voices (Charmaz 2014), we supplement our discussion using selected participant quotes that both articulate the observed themes and are collective experiences. participants’ representative of 7.1. Neutrally satisfying sociocultural expectations of disability Within the U.S., estimates suggest that approximately six percent of college students with disabilities are enroled in engineering programs (NSCES 2016). However, due to the self-reported nature of disability status, the use of systemic procedures that rely on medical deﬁnitions and diagnoses of disability, and the stigmatization of disability in U.S. culture, disabil- ities studies scholars speculate that this number is likely higher (Adams, Reiss, and Serlin 2015). As a result, individuals – particularly those with non- apparent disabilities – may intentionally or uninten- tionally pass as non-disabled to blend in or align with sociocultural norms. For Sammie, a woman diagnosed with Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) before her ﬁnal year of secondary school, the decision not to disclose her learning disability was rooted in a misalignment between perceptions of disability and perceptions of engineering, as well as in the stigmatization of disability within her engineering college: [. . .] it’s ﬁne to say, ‘Don’t mind my [bad] attitude, I’m running on three hours of sleep.’ Because you can ﬁx that. You can get 10 hours of sleep once you’re done with all your stuﬀ, and say, “Okay, now I’m good to go.’ But when you have a disability, you can’t just solve [the disability]. And also, I think that engineers, we have this idea, we have this concept of we’re AUSTRALASIAN JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION 83 solving problems. That’s all really, most of what engi- neers do is we solve problems. And it’s like, some- times I feel like it’s a problem that I can’t solve, so I just don’t talk about it. With my friends, I pretend that it doesn’t exist, because it’s something that I can’t deal with or correct or solve. (Sammie) In her description, Sammie identiﬁes an identity con- ﬂict between engineering culture (i.e. solving pro- blems) and her conceptualization of her disability (i.e. a problem that cannot be solved). She also depicts an engineering culture in which hard work and strug- gle are expected norms (e.g. not getting enough sleep due to completing course tasks), whereas disabilities are perceived as a failure: Interviewer: [. . .] your shortcomings are more seen as a failure, then? Sammie: Yeah, and that’s where it goes into engineer- ing, is that we all want to pretend like everything is okay, that everything is great, that we’re reaching our highest potential, and that we’re on top of everything. That’s the biggest thing, is that everyone seems to have their [stuﬀ] together but me, so I’m just not going to say anything. To manage her disability in this environment, Sammie described using self-deprecating humour, saying, ‘if you can laugh at yourself, that means no one can make fun of you, and you can’t get hurt.’ Hence, due to the stigma surrounding disability on her campus, and particularly within her engineering college, Sammie typically will not disclose or discuss her learn- ing disability with those around her, allowing her to pass as a student without a disability. in his Darren passes as a non-disabled student by not requesting accommodations courses. As a veteran who experienced a traumatic brain injury while deployed overseas, he describes instances in which his ‘bad brain days’ impact his performance on course tasks that require him to retain a lot of information in a short amount of time. When asked if he had any accommodations through the university, Darren responded: I do not. I’m not really sure if I need an accommoda- tion or if an accommodation will help me, and I’m not sure what they can do. I probably should actually talk to them about it. Because when I have the bad brain days, I don’t know when it’s going to happen. [. . .] I’ll go [into the exam] and everything will just go out, like I can barely remember to write my own name on the test. I just sit there and stare at the words and I’m like, “I don’t even understand any of this.” So, I don’t know what kind of an accommodation they could do for that, but I probably should ﬁnd out. [. . .] That’s the stubborn part of [. . .] like, they’re not going to help me anyway, and they weren’t going to help me, or I just didn’t want to ask for help, I guess. (Darren) As described by Sammie and Darren, these instances do not indicate an active challenge or alignment with 84 C. MCCALL ET AL. larger cultural norms. Rather, they highlight a few of the many reasons why an individual may pass as non- disabled within their engineering programs contexts (e.g. for Sammie to avoid ridicule and for Darren being too ‘stubborn’ to seek accommodations – or too jaded by past experiences in which he was not helped) (Samuels 2015). Still, they highlight cultural features that frame civil engineering and engineering within the U.S. and Australia broadly as meritocracies that reward hard work and talent (Cech 2013; Godfrey 2014) and where disability, as described by partici- pants in this study, is not openly discussed. 7.2. Challenging sociocultural expectations of disability Other participants described instances of challenging normative expectations of disability, particularly in academic settings. Johnny, a recent graduate who was diagnosed with Attention Deﬁcit Disorder (ADD) during primary school, spoke to this theme at length when describing how faculty reacted to his extended testing accommodations: . . . except for three professors, everyone was really rude about it. They would always ask me more ques- tions than were necessary. [. . .] When I ﬁrst requested it, people were really, really rude. Like, “Really? Do you really want that?” They bring up a really, I don’t know, micro-aggressive tone, [. . .] Sometimes they’d actually send me back to the resource center to get extra veriﬁcation that I wasn’t trying to cheat or something. It was really weird. (Johnny) I would say. Although Johnny had requested accommodations through his university’s student services oﬃce, he still experienced pushback from faculty and had to repetitively explain his disability to justify using accommodation. He experienced similar questions from his peers: . . . more often than not, they are like, “Did you drop the class? Why weren’t you in the exam? Why weren’t you in the room taking the exam with us?” People would always question. I explained that to them, and then people wouldn’t believe me in school. “I have a learning disability.” “Johnny, you’re right [on home- work], why do you have to do that?” [. . .] The hard part was explaining it to my peers. A lot of my peers would never really accept that, really. (Johnny) Despite Johnny’s repeated disclosure of disability to faculty and peers, they struggled to comprehend and, in some instances, accept that one can have a learning disability and need accommodations while performing well in school. Because Johnny challenges normative expectations, his instructors and peers questioned whether his accommodations were necessary and implied that he might have been trying to cheat in his courses and exams. Madison also described having to repeatedly justify why she has speciﬁc accommodations. Upon entering college, Madison was diagnosed with Lyme Disease, and she explained that its symptoms manifest in a variety of ways based on individuals’ pre- dispositions. Madison’s symptoms included severe knee and general joint pain that sometimes signiﬁ- cantly impacted her mobility to, from, and across campus: There was this semester where I drove to class every single day because it hurt too much to walk the whole way. [. . .] I’d leave my house like 45 minutes before my class started so I could take my time [walking] there. Then eventually I was like, “No, I’m just driv- ing. I can’t do this every day.” (Madison) Because of her mobility impairment, Madison uses a placard to gain access to close parking spots on campus on ‘bad days’ when her mobility is impacted most. However, these symptoms are also intermittent; they do not consistently or continuously impact her mobility, which challenges the perception that anyone with a handicap parking pass must have a constant mobility impairment: I have a handicap parking pass, and people are always like, “Why do you have a handicapped parking pass?” I’m like, “I don’t use it every day. I use it when I have bad days,” and stuﬀ like that. Then I feel like I have to explain then too because I can’t just be like, “Oh, I just have a handicap parking pass.” They’re like, “Why? That doesn’t make sense,” because those are kind of hard to get. [. . .] People are really bitter that I have it and they don’t [. . .]. (Madison) and Madison’s experiences Johnny reveal a paradoxical relationship among disability, social expectation, and accommodation. Their accommoda- tions are questioned as a necessity by non-disabled individuals precisely because they work; they allow Johnny to be successful in a course and Madison to quickly and eﬃciently navigate campus. This paradox further highlights the pervasiveness of ability privilege within our institutions, which assume that if an indi- vidual is not experiencing an apparent struggle, accommodations are providing unnecessary support. As a result, participants also discussed instances in which they would moderate or limit the use of accom- modations to avoid perceptions of cheating or abusing institutional support. 7.3. Ascribing to sociocultural expectations of disability While some participants neutrally satisﬁed or chal- lenged normative expectations of disability, others aligned their behaviours with or deﬁned their experi- ences using broader conceptualizations of disability in society. Alignment occurred as participants either to enact accepted, normative learned the skills behaviours or, drawing from sociocultural expecta- tions, to deﬁne and conceptualize disability. Shawn, a woman who identiﬁes as autistic, described a realization that she was diﬀerent from her peers at an early age. To enhance Shawn’s com- munication skills, she was encouraged to participate in activities and sports, such as dance and cheerleading, to learn normative communication skills and other types of social interaction. Here, Shawn describes an instance in which she realized that communication was not only verbal, but also physical: I would be at a concert with my mom [. . .] and I would be having the best time, but my face would just be like [makes a serious, non-expressive face on screen]. The entire time. My mom would just be like “Are you okay? Are you having fun?” I’m like “Yeah, I’m having a lot of fun.” Straight monotone. That’s something that I had to learn, that you don’t do that. If you’re happy, you smile. If you’re sad, you need to frown. If you think something’s funny, you need to laugh. That’s become second nature to me now, just because I’ve done it so much, like a creature of habit, now. But way back when, growing up, that wasn’t something I did. It was just basically all one emotion all the time. (Shawn) so much that Societal norms shape our expectations of how indivi- duals should act in public. Shawn practiced these accepted behaviours they have become second nature, which enables her to align with sociocultural expectations of interpersonal inter- action and communicate with others. However, many autistic individuals have described such practices as exhausting and overwhelming, leaving them emotion- ally, mentally, and physically drained of energy when engaging with the general public. Another emergent aspect of alignment included ways participants’ perceptions and deﬁnitions were inﬂuenced by established sociocultural norms. For example, Angela was diagnosed with depression and anxiety during secondary school and, more recently, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). When asked if she considers herself to be disabled, Angela replied: I usually don’t . . . I have depression, anxiety, and [obsessive compulsive disorder], which none of them are physical disabilities, and because they aﬀect so many people, I don’t normally think of them as a disability. But obviously, they do actually qualify as one and they do actually make things harder. I don’t tend to think of them as a disability. (Angela) conceptualization Here, Angela aligns her mental health disabilities with general colloquial conceptualizations of disability in in nature – the U.S.: disabilities are physical in Cunninghame, echoed a Costello, and Trinidad's (2016) review of research funded by Australia’s National Centre for Student Equity in Higher Education (NCSEHE). Despite Angela’s acknowledgment that her mental health AUSTRALASIAN JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION 85 diagnoses qualify as disabilities and that they can sig- niﬁcantly impact her life, she does not identify as disabled or having a disability. This de-identiﬁcation reﬂects current debates in the U.S. that typically stig- matize mental health and question its status as a disability or medical condition. 7.4. Summary Overall, the experiences described by study partici- pants highlight the complex nature by which stu- dents with disabilities are required to navigate undergraduate engineering programs – and ulti- mately undergraduate engineering culture. Within engineering education, a plethora of work has been conducted examining a variety of cultural charac- teristics that are reﬂected in participants’ accounts. For example, Dryburgh (1999) identiﬁed the ‘work hard, play hard’ culture (664), which is reﬂected in Sammie’s interactions with her peers who commend one another for sleepless nights and lengthy study sessions. Stevens et al. (2007) similarly identiﬁed engineering as a ‘meritocracy of diﬃculty’ that posi- tions one’s ability to persevere through diﬃcult content as a key marker of an engineer’s worth. further highlighted in Johnny’s This experience where his faculty and peers often ques- tioned his use of and, most importantly, his need for accommodations because of his high academic performance. While this list is not encompassing of all cultural characteristics identiﬁed in engineering, it provides benchmarks that students use to impli- citly or their belonging to engineering. explicitly indicate theme is The U.S. participants in this study highlighted a number of national cultural and engineering cul- tural features that echo those identiﬁed in studies of Australian universities. Such examples of this align- ment include hard work as an indicator of quality (Godfrey 2014) and eﬀorts to broaden participation for women and other minoritized groups (Godfrey 2014; Goldﬁnch et al. 2016; Male and MacNish 2015; Mills et al. 2006; Waling and Roﬀee 2018). Speciﬁc to disability, aligning cultural characteristics include lower retention and success rates for students with disabilities (Kilpatrick et al. 2016; Richardson, Bennett, and Roberts 2016) and a lack of knowledge of support structures for students with disabilities among university administration, faculty, and staﬀ (Ganguly et al. 2015; O wen et al.2016). While these national and disciplinary cultural parallels do not necessarily mean that Australian engineering stu- dents with disabilities share the experiences of those in our study, our ﬁndings open an important dialo- gue that begins with responding to Cunninghame, Costello, and Trinidad's (2016) calls for additional research. 86 C. MCCALL ET AL. 8. Implications and conclusions inclusive education As highlighted by debates of (Forlin 2004; Konza 2008; Linton 1998) and the ableist structures that permeate our educational systems (Bogart and Dunn 2019; McLean, Heagney, and Gardner 2003), our academic contexts are imbued with sociocultural expectations and norms that inﬂu- ence how individuals navigate school, the workplace, and their lives (McLean, Heagney, and Gardner 2003). For many faculty and students, these navigational stra- tegies go unnoticed, despite their signiﬁcant inﬂuences on the ways students with disabilities experience school and form professional identities (Kimball et al. 2016). By bringing these students’ voices to the forefront of our work, we revealed nuanced insights into the ways students navigate sociocultural expectations of under- graduate engineering as they become engineers. Overall, this study identiﬁed three types of navigational strategies employed by students with disabilities during their undergraduate experiences: (1) neutrally satisfying expectations (i.e. passing as non-disabled), (2) challen- ging expectations (i.e. enacting characteristics of dis- ability that do not conform to normative conceptions), or (3) aligning with expectations (i.e. utilizing broader societal norms to deﬁne, conceptualize, or enact one’s own disability). We emphasize here that these strategies vary and one type is not better than another; it is up to the individual to determine what type of strategy they want to employ to meet their own needs and contexts. While this study has been conducted within the context of civil engineering, this study may be applied across disciplinary contexts identiﬁed by and align with inclusion eﬀorts Cunninghame, Costello, and Trinidad (2016). To be more inclusive of individuals with disabilities within the U.S. and Australian contexts, we must culturally move beyond monolithic and medicalized concep- tions of disability that position disability and engineer- ing in opposition of one another. We must listen to our students and develop practices that promote uni- versal accessibility rather than accommodation. To accomplish this, we must reconsider our course struc- tures and curricula. For example, practices such as heavily weighted, timed exams can create unnecessary access barriers for students with a variety of disabil- ities, particularly as they manage accommodations in addition to studying content. As we begin to shift how we teach and assess engineering content, we can begin to construct a new and more inclusive culture that allow students with disabilities to ﬂourish in engineer- ing and beyond. implications of Acknowledgments This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Award No. 1733636. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation. Disclosure statement No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors. Funding This work was Foundation [1733636]. supported by the National Science Notes on contributors Cassandra McCall is a post-doctoral research associate in the Department of Engineering Education at Virginia Tech. She holds B.S. and M.S. degrees in Civil Engineering from the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology and a Ph.D. in engineering education from Virginia Tech. Her research interests include utilizing a discipline-based focus to explore the professional identity formation of undergrad- uate civil engineering students and the in- and out-of-class experiences that shape them. She is also interested in the application of Grounded Theory and other qualitative methods to gain a nuanced understanding of individual student experiences. Currently, Dr. McCall is serving as Principal Investigator on an NSF-funded project examining the professional identity formation of undergraduate civil engineering students with disabilities. ORCID: https://orcid. org/0000-0002-0240-432X Ashley Shew is an Assistant Professor of Science, Technology, and Society at Virginia Tech, aﬃliated in the Alliance for Social, Political, Ethical, and Cultural Thought, and a founding faculty member of the Regenerative Medicine Interdisciplinary Graduate Education Program at Virginia Tech. She serves as co-chair to the Disability Caucus at VT, advisor to the Disability Alliance at VT, and a board member for the New River Valley Disability Resource Center. She holds B.A. and M.A. degrees in in Science and Philosophy and an M.S. and Ph.D. Technology Studies. She has an NSF CAREER Award (1750260) on Disability, Experience, and Technological Imagination. Her work centers on the narratives disabled tell about their relationship to technology - often diﬀerent from depictions in popular media and engineering litera- ture. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9812-0873 Denise R. Simmons, PE, PMP, LEED-AP is an Associate Professor of Civil Engineering and holds a B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. in civil engineering (CE) and a graduate certiﬁcate in engineering education. She has over ten years of construc- tion and CE experience working for energy companies and as a project management consultant. She has extensive experience leading and conducting multi-institutional, workforce-related research and outreach. She is a leader in research investigating professional formation of civil engi- neers, with a speciﬁc focus on project management and the practical strategies that transform and sustain inclusive and the productive organizations. She Simmons Research Lab (SRL: www.denisersimmons.com), which is home to a dynamic, interdisciplinary mix of grad- uate researchers and postdoctoral researchers working at the intersection of construction engineering and management, workforce development, and CE education. The SRL is currently oversees supported by multiple research grants, including a CAREER award funded by the National Science Foundation. ORCID: http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3401-2048 Marie C. Paretti is a Professor of Engineering Education at Virginia Tech and director of the Virginia Tech Engineering Communication Center (VTECC). She holds a B.S. in che- mical engineering and an M.A. in English from Virginia Tech and Ph.D. in English from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Drawing on theories of situated learn- ing and social construction, her work includes multiple NSF-funded studies on the teaching and learning of com- munication, eﬀective teaching practices in design education, the eﬀects of diﬀering pedagogies on personal and profes- sional identities, the dynamics of cross-disciplinary colla- boration in academia and industry, and marginalized identities in engineering. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000- 0002-2202-6928 Lisa D. McNair is a Professor of Engineering Education at Virginia Tech and Director of the Center for Educational Networks and Impacts (CENI) at the Institute for Creativity, Arts and Technology (ICAT). She develops integrative edu- cation projects that transverse perspectives within and beyond the university. Her currently funded NSF projects include revolutionizing the VT ECE department, identifying practices in intentionally inclusive Maker spaces, and exploring professional in Civil Engineering students with disabilities. Her work in CENI focuses on building networks between the University and multiple community sectors and supporting engagement in science, engineering, arts, and design. ORCID: https://orcid. org/0000-0001-6654-2337 identity development References Abes, E. S., S. R. Jones, and M. K. McEwen. 2007. “Reconceptualizing the Model of Multiple Dimensions of Identity: The Role of Meaning-Making Capacity in the Construction of Multiple Identities.” Journal of College Student Development 48 (1): 1–22. doi:10.1353/ csd.2007.0000. Abrams, D. 2015. and Intergroup Relations.” In APA Handbook of Personality and Social Psychology: Group Processes, edited by M. Mikulincer, P. R. Shaver, J. F. Dovidio, and J. A. Simpson, 203–228. Washington, Psychology Association. doi:10.1037/14342-008. American “Social Identity Adams, R., B. Reiss, and D. Serlin. 2015. “Disability.” In Keywords for Disability Studies, edited by R. Adams, B. Reiss, and D. Serlin, 5–11. New York: New York University Press. DC: Barnard-Brak, L., T. Sulak, A. Tate, and D. A. Lechtenberger. 2010. “Measuring College Students’ Attitudes toward Requesting Accommodations: A National Multi- institutional Study.” Assessment for Eﬀective Intervention 35 (3): 141–147. doi:10.1177/1534508409358900. Bogart, K. R., and D. S. Dunn. 2019. “Ableism Special Issue Introduction.” Journal of Social Issues 75 (3): 650–664. doi:10.1111/josi.12354. Brown, L. X. Z. 2011. “The Signiﬁcance of Semantics: Person-First Language: Why It Matters.” https://www. autistichoya.com/2011/08/signiﬁcance-of-semantics- person-ﬁrst.html Butler, M., L. Holloway, K. Marriott, and C. Goncu. 2017. “Understanding the Graphical Challenges Faced by Vision-Impaired Students in Australian Universities.” AUSTRALASIAN JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION 87 Higher Education Research and Development 36 (1): 59–72. doi:10.1080/07294360.2016.1177001. 2006. Capobianco, B. M. “Undergraduate Women Engineering Their Professional Identities.” Journal of Women and Minorities in Science and Engineering 12 (2–3): 95–117. doi:10.1615/JWomenMinorScienEng.v12. i2-3.10. Cech, E. A. 2013. “The (Mis)framing of Social Justice: Why Ideologies of Depoliticization and Meritocracy Hinder Engineers’ Ability to Think about Social Injustices.” Social Justice: Critical Explorations and Opportunities, edited by J. Lucena, Vol. 10, 67–84. doi:10.1007/978-94-007- 6350-0. In Engineering Education for Cech, E. A., and T. J. Waidzunas. 2011. “Navigating the Heteronormativity of Engineering: The Experiences of Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Students.” Engineering Studies 3 (1): 1–24. doi:10.1080/19378629.2010.545065. Charlton, J. I. 2000. Nothing about Us without Us: Disability Oppression and Empowerment. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. Charmaz, K. 2014. Constructing Grounded Theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Chubin, D. E., G. S. May, and E. L. Babco. 2005. “Diversifying the Engineering Workforce.” Journal of Engineering Education 94 (1): 73–86. doi:10.1002/j.2168- 9830.2005.tb00830.x. Collins, P. H. 2015. “Intersectionality’s Deﬁnitional Dilemmas.” Annual Review of Sociology 41 (1): 1–20. doi:10.1146/annurev-soc-073014-112142. Commwealth of Australia. 2015. Disability Discrimination Act 1992. doi:10.1136/inpract.18.7.345-d. and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique Crenshaw, K. 1989. “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory, and Antiracist Politics [1989].” In University of Chicago Legal Forum, 139–167. doi:10.4324/9780429500480. Creswell, J. W. 2013. Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing among Five Approaches. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. Cunninghame, I., D. Costello, and S. Trinidad 2016. “Issues and Trends for Students with Disability: Review of NCSEHE-Funded Research.” https://www.ncsehe.edu. au/publications/issues-trends-students-disability-review- ncsehe-funded-research/ DasGupta, S. 2015. “Medicalization.” In Keywords for Disability Studies, edited by R. Adams, B. Reiss, and D. Serlin, 120–121. New York: New York University Press. Davis, L. J. 2015. “Diversity.” In Keywords for Disability Studies, edited by R. Adams, B. Reiss, and D. Serlin, 61–64. New York: New York University Press. 2015. Disability Discrimination Act Information.” https://www.disabled- world.com/disability/australia/ Disabled World. “Australian Downey, G. L. 2014. “The Normative Contents of Engineering Formation: Engineering Studies.” In The Education of Cambridge Handbook Research, edited by A. Johri and B. M. Olds, 693–711. New York: Cambridge University Press. Engineering Dryburgh, H. 1999. “Work Hard, Play Hard: Women and Professionalization in Engineering - Adapting to the Culture.” doi:10.1177/ 089124399013005006. 664–682. Engineers Australia. 2017. “Divesrsity and Inclusion Action Plan: 2017–2020.” https://www.engineersaustralia.org.au/ Diversity-Strategy (5): 13 88 C. MCCALL ET AL. Faulkner, W. 2000. “Dualisms, Hierarchies and Gender in Engineering.” Social Studies of Science 30 (5): 759–792. doi:10.1177/030631200030005005. Foor, C. E., S. E. Walden, and D. A. Trytten. 2007. ““I Wish that I Belonged More in This Whole Engineering Group:” Achieving Individual Diversity.” Journal of Engineering Education 96 (2): 103–115. doi:10.1002/j.2168-9830.2007. tb00921.x. Forlin, C. 2004. “Promoting Inclusivity in Western Australian Schools.” International Journal of Inclusive Education doi:10.1080/ 1360311032000158042. 185–202. (2): 8 Gale, T., and S. Parker. 2013. Widening Participation in Australian Higher Education. Oxon, UK: Routledge. Ganguly, R., C. Brownlow, J. Du Preez, and C. Graham 2015. “Resilience/Thriving in Post-Secondary Students with Disabilities.” https://www.ncsehe.edu.au/wp-content /uploads/2015/11/Resilience-Thriving-in-Post-Secondary- Students-with-Disabilities-November-2015.pdf Gee, J. P. 2011. An Introduction to Discourse Analysis: Theory and Method. 3rd ed. New York: Routledge. Godfrey, E. 2014. “Understanding Disciplinary Cultures.” In The Cambridge Handbook of Engineering Education Research, edited by A. Johri and B. M. Olds, 437–455. New York: Cambridge University Press. Godfrey, E., and L. Parker. 2010. “Mapping the Cultural in Engineering Education.” Landscape Journal of Engineering Education 99 (1): 5–22. doi:10.1002/j.2168- 9830.2010.tb01038.x. Goldﬁnch, T., L. Jolly, J. K. Prpic, and E. Leigh 2016. “Australian Engineering Educators’ Perceptions of Indigenous Cultures and Challenges of Minority Inclusion.” Proceedings of the 44th Annual Conference of the European Society for Engineering Education, Tampere, Finland: SEFI. Groen, C. 2017. “Advancing from Outsider to Insider: A Grounded Identity of Negotiation (Virginia Tech).” https://doi.org/http://hdl. handle.net/10919/77392 Professional Theory Shew 2018a. “Exploring Professional Groen, C., L. D. McNair, M. C. Paretti, D. R. Simmons, and Identity A. Development in Undergraduate Civil Engineering Students Who Experience Disabilities.” Proceedings of the 125th American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference. https://doi.org/https://peer.asee.org/ 30052 Shew 2018b. “Experiencing Disability Groen, C., M. C. Paretti, L. D. McNair, D. R. Simmons, and A. in Undergraduate Civil Engineering Education: An Initial Examination of the Intersection of Disability and Professional Identities.” Proceedings of the 1st Annual Collaborative Network for Engineering and Computing Diversity Conference. https://doi.org/https://peer.asee. org/29536 Campus Hadley, W. M. 2011. “College Students with Disabilities: A Student Developmental Perspective.” In Disability Services by W. S. Harbour and J. S. Madaus, 77–81. doi:10.1002/he. Jamieson, L. H., and J. R. Lohmann. 2009. Creating A Culture for Scholarly and Systematic Innovation in Engineering Education: Ensuring Engineering Has the Right People with the Right Talents for A Global Society. Washington, DC: American Society for Engineering Education. Dynamics, edited Jorgenson, J. 2002. “Engineering Selves: Negotiating Gender in Technical Work.” Management and Communication Quarterly 15 (3): 350–380. doi:10.1177/ 0893318902153002. Identity and Kent, M. 2016. “Access and Barriers to Online Education for People with Disabilities.” https://www.ncsehe.edu.au/wp- content/uploads/2016/05/Access-and-Barriers-to-Online -Education-for-People-with-Disabilities.pdf Kilpatrick, S., S. Johns, R. Barnes, D. Mclennan, S. Fischer, and K. Magnussen. 2016. Exploring the Retention & Success of Students with Disability. https://doi.org/http:// www.ncsehe.edu.au/publications/exploring-the- retention-and-success-of-students-with-disability/ of Theory Kimball, E. W., R. S. Wells, B. J. Ostiguy, C. A. Manly, and A. A. Lauterback. 2016. “Students with Disabilities in Higher Education: A Review of the Literature and an Agenda for Future Research.” In Higher Education: Handbook by M. B. Paulsen, 91–156. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-26829-3. Konza, D. 2008. “Inclusion of Students with Disabilities in New Times: Responding to the Challenge.” In Learning and the Learner: Exploring Learning for New Times, edi- ted by P. Kell, W. Vialle, D. Konza, and G. Vogl, 39–64. https://doi.org/https://ro.uow.edu.au/edupapers/36/ and Research, edited Koshy, P., and R. Seymour 2015. “Student Equity Performance in Australian Higher Education (2007–- 2014).” https://www.ncsehe.edu.au/wp-content/uploads/ 2015/09/Student-Equity-Performance-in-Australian- Higher-Education-2007-to-2014.pdf Lee, A. 2014. “Students with Disabilities Choosing Science Technology Engineering and Math (STEM) Majors in Postsecondary Institutions.” Journal of Postsecondary Education and Disability 27 (3): 261–272. Lichtenstein, G. L., H. G. Loshbaugh, B. Claar, H. L. Chen, K. Jackson, and S. D. Sheppard. 2009. “An Engineering Major Does Not (Necessarily) an Engineer Make : Career Decision Making among Undergraduate Engineering Majors.” Journal of Engineering Education 98 (3): 227–234. doi:10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01021.x. Liebowitz, C. 2015. “I Am Disabled: On Identity-First versus People-First Language.” https://thebodyisnotanapology. com/magazine/i-am-disabled-on-identity-ﬁrst-versus- people-ﬁrst-language/ Linton, S. 1998. Claiming Disability. New York: New York University Press. Male, S. A., and C. MacNish. 2015. “Pilot Exploration of Gender Inclusivity of Engineering Students’ Exposure to Engineering Practice in an Australian University.” Australasian Journal of Engineering Education 20 (2): 135–144. doi:10.1080/22054952.2015.111617610.1080/ 22054952.2015.1116176. Martin, J., N. Stumbo, L. Martin, K. Collins, B. Hedrick, D. Nordstrom, and M. Peterson. 2011. “Recruitment of Students with Disabilities: Exploration of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics.” The Journal of Postsecondary Education and Disability 24 (4): 285–299. https://doi.org/http://www.ahead-archive.org/uploads/pub lications/JPED/jped24_4/JPED%2024_4.pdf McGee, E. O., and D. B. Martin. 2011. ““You Would Not Believe What I Have to Go through to Prove My Intellectual Value!” Stereotype Management among and Academically Engineering Students.” American Educational Research Journal doi:10.3102/ 0002831211423972. Successful Black Mathematics 1347–1389. McLean, P., M. Heagney, and K. Gardner. 2003. “Going Global: The Implications for Students with a Disability.” International Journal of Phytoremediation 21 (1): 217–228. doi:10.1080/07294360304109. (6): 48 Mills, J., W. Bastalich, S. Franzway, J. Gill, and R. Sharp. 2006. “Engineering in Australia: An Uncomfortable for Women.” Experience Journal of Women and Minorities in Science and Engineering 12 (2–3): 135–154. doi:10.1615/JWomenMinorScienEng.v12.i2-3. NCES. 2019. “Postsecondary Education.” In Digest of Education Statistics, 2017. https://nces.ed.gov/programs/ digest/d17/ch_3.asp NSCES. 2016. Major Field of Study of Undergraduates, by Disability Status: 2016. Washington DC: National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation. Owen, C., D. McCann, C. Rayner, C. Devereaux, F. Sheehan, and L. Quarmby 2016. “Supporting Students with Autism Spectrum Disorder in Higher Education.” https://doi.org/ http://www.ncsehe.edu.au/publications/supporting- students-with-autism-spectrum-disorder-in-higher- education/ Pearson Weatherton, Y., R. D. Mayes, and C. Villanueva- Perez 2017. “Barriers to Persistence of Engineering Students with Disabilities: A Review of Literature.” Proceedings of the 124th Annual American Society for Engineering Education Conference. https://doi.org/ https://peer.asee.org/27650 Richardson, S., D. Bennett, and L. Roberts 2016. “Investigating the Relationship between Equity and Graduate Outcomes in Australia.” https://doi.org/http://www.ncsehe.edu.au/publi cations/investigating-the-relationship-between-equity-and- graduate-outcomes-in-australia/ J. 2007. “Learning Disabilities in Australian and Unwelcome.” Universities: Hidden, Journal of Learning Disabilities 40 (5): 436–442. doi:10.1177/00222194070400050701. Ignored, Ryan, of the Samuels, E. 2015. “Passing.” In Keywords for Disability Studies, edited by R. Adams, B. Reiss, and D. Serlin, 135–137. New York: New York University Press. Sattler, B., J. Turns, and K. Gygi 2009. “How Do Engineering Educators Take Student Diﬀerence into Account?” Proceedings in Education Conference. doi:10.1109/FIE.2009.5350667. 2009 Frontiers Simmons, D. R. 2012. “First Generation College Students in Engineering: A Grounded Theory Study of Family Inﬂuence on Academic Decision Making (Clemson University).” https://doi.org/https://tigerprints.clemson. edu/all_dissertations/932 Spears, R. 2011. “Group Identities: The Social Identity Perspective.” In Handbook of Identity Theory and Research, edited by S. J. Schwartz, K. Luyckx, and V. L. Vignoles, 201–224. doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-7988-9. “Literature Review on Disability Participation in the Engineering Field.” Proceedings of the Spingola, E. 2018. AUSTRALASIAN JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION 89 125th Annual American Society for Engineering Education Conference. https://doi.org/https://peer.asee.org/30776 Steele, C. M. 2011. Whistling Vivaldi: How Stereotypes Aﬀect Us and What We Can Do (Issues of Our Time). London: W. W. Norton & Company. Stevens, R., D. Amos, A. Jocuns, and L. Garrison 2007. “Engineering as Lifestyle and a Meritocracy of Diﬃculty: Two Pervasive Beliefs among Engineering Students and Their Possible Eﬀects.” Proceedings of the 2007 American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference. https://doi.org/https://peer.asee. org/2791 Svyantek, M. V. 2016. “Missing from the Classroom: Current Representations of Disability in Engineering Education.” Proceedings of the 123rd American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference and Exposition. doi:10.18260/p.25728. Tajfel, H., and J. Turner. 1979. “An Integrative Theory of Intergroup Conﬂict.” In The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations, edited by W. G. Austin and S. Worchel, 33–47. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole. Tonso, K. L. 2006a. “Student Engineers and Engineer Identity: Campus Engineer as Figured World.” Cultural Studies of Science Education 1 (2): 273–307. doi:10.1007/s11422-005-9009-2. Identities Tonso, K. L. 2006b. “Teams that Work: Campus Culture, Engineer Identity, and Social Interactions.” Journal of Engineering Education 95 (1): 25–37. doi:10.1002/ jee.2006.95.issue-1. Tonso, K. L. 2014. “Engineering Identity.” In Cambridge Handbook of Engineering Education Research, edited by A. Johri and B. M. Olds, 267–282. New York: Cambridge University Press. U.S. Department of Justice. 2009. “A Guide to Disability Rights and Laws.” Accessed 7 July 2018 https://www.ada. gov/cguide.htm#anchor62335 Vaccaro, A., E. W. Kimball, R. S. Wells, and B. J. Ostiguy. “Researching Students with Disabilities: The 2015. Importance of Critical Perspectives.” New Directions for Institutional Research 2014 (163): 25–41. doi:10.1002/ ir.20084. Waling, A., and J. A. Roﬀee. 2018. “Supporting LGBTIQ+ Students in Higher Education in Australia: Diversity, Inclusion and Visibility.” Health Education Journal 77 (6): 667–679. doi:10.1177/0017896918762233. Young, S. 2014. “I’m Not Your Inspiration, Thank You Very Much.” TEDxSydney website. https://www.ted.com/ talks/stella_young_i_m_not_your_inspiration_thank_ you_very_much